---
layout: post
title: Make Option "--vanilla" Default for All R Sessions
category: R
updateDate: 17 Jan 2017
---


## Motivation

It is usually recommended not to save the workspace every time when we quit an
**R** session so that no workspace will be automatically loaded next time. It
prevents potential problem especially when someone is unaware of that the
previous workspace is loaded automatically in the current **R** session.  It
also speeds up the initialization of **R** without loading possibly large
`.RData` file. Without any customization, **R** will ask whether we would like
to save the workspace whenever we try to close it, which can be really annoying
sometimes.


In addition, we may have some customization in the site-wide `Rprofile.site` or
user environment file `.Rprofile`, which helps us set up an **R** session
catering to our own flavors or convenience.  For example, the `options("repos")`
can be set in `.Rprofile` so that we do not need specify one of the CRAN mirrors
whenever installing or updating packages. Certain package, such
as [**colorout**][url-colorout] for colorful **R** output in terminal
or [**data.table**][cran-data.table] for efficient data processing can be
automatically attached to the global environment as the startup of **R**
session.  However, it is possible that we get so used to these sweet tweaks,
take them for granted, and forget their existence after a certain period of
time. Therefore, we need be careful when checking the reproducibility of the
**R** scripts we wrote.


All the trouble can be avoided by turning on the option `--vanilla` (or
`--no-save --no-restore` if we want to keep some trivial but sweet customization).


## Some Relevant Options of R Command

All the options of **R** command and their explanation can be found by `man R`.
Some relevant options are given for a quick reference as follows:

```
--no-save
    Don't save it

--no-environ
    Don't read the site and user environment files

--no-site-file
    Don't read the site-wide Rprofile

--no-init-file
    Don't read the user R profile

--no-restore
    Don't restore anything

--vanilla
    Combine --no-save, --no-restore, --no-site-file, --no-init-file and --no-environ
```

From `man R`, the option `--vanilla` is a combined option of `--no-save`,
`--no-restore`, `--no-site-file`, `--no-init-file`, and `--no-environ` for a
vanilla environment.


## Make option `--vanilla` default

+ We may add an alias of `R` in `.bashrc` so that the **R** session called in
  terminal or Rstudio will actually have `--vanilla` turned on by default.

```
alias R="$(/usr/bin/which R) --vanilla"
```

It is easy to verify whether the alias does the trick (after `source
~/.bashrc`). Just start a new `R` session in the terminal by entering `R` and
type `q()` to quit. If **R** does not ask whether you would like to save the
workspace, you were actually using `R --vanilla`.


+ For using [ESS](https://ess.r-project.org/), we may customize the `R` argument
  by `M-x customize-variable`, `inferior-R-args`, and setting it to be
  `--vanilla`. Or put the following sample configure into `.custom.el` directly
  inside the `custom-set-variables` as follows:

```lisp
(custom-set-variables
;; other customization
'(inferior-R-args "--vanilla")
)
```


To keep some trivial but really sweet customization in `.Rprofile`, we may
consider replacing the option `--vanilla` with `--no-save --no-restore` in the
steps given above.



[url-colorout]: https://github.com/jalvesaq/colorout
[cran-data.table]: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=data.table
